# Chapter 4: R2004 DWG FILE FORMAT ORGANIZATION

4 R2004 DWG FILE FORMAT ORGANIZATION
### 4.1 R2004 File Header


Address
Length
Description
0x00
6
“AC1018” version string
0x06
5
5 bytes of 0x00
0x0B
1
Maintenance release version
0x0C
1
Byte 0x00, 0x01, or 0x03
0x0D
4
Preview address (long), points to the image page + page header size (0x20).
0x11
1
Application version (Acad version that writes the file)
0x12
1
Application maintenance release version (Acad maintenance version that
writes the file)
0x13
2
Codepage
0x15
3
3 0x00 bytes
0x18
4
Security flags, default value is 0 (long)
0x0001 = encrypt data (used for all data sections except AcDb:Preview and
AcDb:SummaryInfo)
0x0002 = encrypt properties (used for sections AcDb:Preview and
AcDb:SummaryInfo)
0x0010 = sign data
0x0020 = add timestamp
0x1C
4
Unknown long (ODA writes 0)
0x20
4
Summary info Address, points to summary info page + page header size
(0x20)

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

24


0x24
4
VBA Project Address (Optional, write 0 if not present)
0x28
4
0x00000080
0x2C
0x54
0x00 bytes
0x80
0x6C
Encrypted Data (see below)
The encrypted data at 0x80 can be decrypted by exclusive or’ing the 0x6c bytes of data from the file with
the following magic number sequence:
29 23 BE 84 E1 6C D6 AE 52 90 49 F1 F1 BB E9 EB
B3 A6 DB 3C 87 0C 3E 99 24 5E 0D 1C 06 B7 47 DE
B3 12 4D C8 43 BB 8B A6 1F 03 5A 7D 09 38 25 1F
5D D4 CB FC 96 F5 45 3B 13 0D 89 0A 1C DB AE 32
20 9A 50 EE 40 78 36 FD 12 49 32 F6 9E 7D 49 DC
AD 4F 14 F2 44 40 66 D0 6B C4 30 B7
This magic sequence can be generated by the following code, which generates the sequence and stores it
in the data vector:

OdUInt8* p = data.asArrayPtr();
OdUInt32 sz = 0x6c;
int randseed = 1;
while (sz--)
{
randseed *= 0x343fd;
randseed += 0x269ec3;
*p++ = (OdUInt8)(randseed >> 0x10);
}
Once decrypted, this sequence of bytes consists of the following data (we will call this data the 2004 File
Header Data throughout the remainder of this document). The file header data is repeated at the end of the
file (this is the second header data).

Address (from start of 0x6c byte
sequence)
Length
Description

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

25


0x00
12
“AcFssFcAJMB” file ID string
0x0C
4
0x00 (long)
0x10
4
0x6c (long)
0x14
4
0x04 (long)
0x18
4
Root tree node gap
0x1C
4
Lowermost left tree node gap
0x20
4
Lowermost right tree node gap
0x24
4
Unknown long (ODA writes 1)
0x28
4
Last section page Id
0x2C
8
Last section page end address
0x34
8
Second header data address pointing to the repeated
header data at the end of the file
0x3C
4
Gap amount
0x40
4
Section page amount
0x44
4
0x20 (long)
0x48
4
0x80 (long)
0x4C
4
0x40 (long)
0x50
4
Section Page Map Id
0x54
8
Section Page Map address (add 0x100 to this value)
0x5C
4
Section Map Id
0x60
4
Section page array size
0x64
4
Gap array size
0x68
4
CRC32 (long). See paragraph 2.14.2 for the 32-bit CRC
calculation, the seed is zero. Note that the CRC calculation
is done including the 4 CRC bytes that are initially zero!
So the CRC calculation takes into account all of the 0x6c
bytes of the data in this table.

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

26


The next 0x14 bytes will be copied from the magic number sequence, starting at 0x100 – 0x14. These
0x14 bytes are present in the file header at the beginning of the file, but not at the copy at the end of the
file.
The remaining data in the file is broken up into sections. There are 2 types of sections, System Sections
and Data Sections. A data section consists of 1 or more section pages, a system section consists of just 1
section page. System sections contain maps to navigate through the data sections and pages. System and
data section pages have different page headers.
### 4.2 Section page checksum
The following function (pseudocode) is used to calculate system and data page checksums as stored in the
page header (note that system and data page headers are different).
OdUInt32 checksum(OdUInt32 seed, OdUInt8* data, OdUInt32 size)
{
OdUInt32 sum1 = seed & 0xffff;
OdUInt32 sum2 = seed >> 0x10;
while (size != 0)
{
OdUInt32 chunkSize = min(0x15b0, size);
size -= chunkSize;
for (int i = 0; i < chunkSize; i++)
{
sum1 += *data++;
sum2 += sum1;
}
sum1 %= 0xFFF1;
sum2 %= 0xFFF1;
}
return (sum2 << 0x10) | (sum1 & 0xffff);
}
### 4.3 System section page
A System Section page starts with of the following 0x14 bytes of header data:

Address (from start of section)
Length
Description
0x00
4
Section page type:
Section page map: 0x41630e3b

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

27


Section map: 0x4163003b
0x04
4
Decompressed size of the data that follows
0x08
4
Compressed size of the data that follows
(CompDataSize)
0x0C
4
Compression type (0x02)
0x10
4
Section page checksum
Immediately following this data, there will be CompDataSize bytes of compressed data, which is the
actual data for the section. See the Compression section later in this document for details on the
compression algorithm used. After the compressed data there is second header chunk, but fields
decompressed size, compressed size and checksum are set to zero.
The section page checksum is calculated in two stages. First the checksum (using the data page checksum
function) is calculated from the header data, using a seed of 0. The header data’s checksum being 0 at this
stage, but all other fields should be filled. In the second stage the final checksum is calculated from the
compressed data, using the first checksum as the seed.
Each section page must start on a 0x20 byte boundary of the raw data stream. The empty bytes between
the start of this section and then end of the previous section are filled with as many bytes as needed from
the magic number sequence.
System Sections includeSection page map and Section map. These 2 sections serve as a table of contents
for the remaining sections of the file and their pages. Once these 2 sections have been processed, all other
sections in the file can be accessed randomly.
### 4.4 2004 Section page map
The uncompressed (global) section page map contains the following data:

Offset
Length
Description
0x00
4
Section page number, starts at 1, page numbers are unique per file.
0x04
4
Section size
This repeats, with one number and size for each section page in the file, until the end of the section page
map. Note that this map also contains a reference to the section map, which is a system section. All other
pages are data section pages. The address of each section can be calculated as 0x100 for the first section,
and for each subsequent section the address is the previous section address plus the previous section size.

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

28


If the section number is negative, this represents a gap in the sections (unused data). For a negative
section number, the following data will be present after the section size:

Offset
Length
Description
0x00
4
Parent
0x04
4
Left
0x08
4
Right
0x0C
4
0x00
Taken together, these units of file section information form a vector (1 indexed) of all sections in the file,
and this vector will be referred to as the SectionPageMap throughout the remainder of this document.
Section pages are numbered consecutively. The system section pages are the last pages, with a gap of 1
between the page numbers for the data sections and system sections.
### 4.5 2004 Data section map
The data section map is a map for locating all data sections (i.e. system sections are not present in this
map).
The uncompressed Section Info section contains the following data:

Offset
Length
Description
0x00
4
Number of section descriptions (NumDescriptions)
0x04
4
0x02 (long)
0x08
4
0x00007400 (long)
0x0C
4
0x00 (long)
0x10
4
Unknown (long), ODA writes NumDescriptions here.
Next, the following data is repeated NumDescriptions times:
Offset
Length
Description
0x00
8
Size of section (OdUInt64)

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

29


0x08
4
Page count (PageCount). Note that there can be more pages than
PageCount, as PageCount is just the number of pages written to file. If a
page contains zeroes only, that page is not written to file. These “zero
pages” can be detected by checking if the page’s start offset is bigger than
it should be based on the sum of previously read pages decompressed size
(including zero pages). After reading all pages, if the total decompressed
size of the pages is not equal to the section’s size, add more zero pages to
the section until this condition is met.
0x0C
4
Max Decompressed Size of a section page of this type (normally 0x7400)
0x10
4
Unknown (long)
0x14
4
Compressed (1 = no, 2 = yes, normally 2)

0x18
4
Section Id (starts at 0). The first section (empty section) is numbered 0,
consecutive sections are numbered descending from (the number of
sections – 1) down to 1.
0x1C
4
Encrypted (0 = no, 1 = yes, 2 = unknown)
0x20
64
Section Name (string)
Following this, the following (local) section page map data will be present, repeated PageCount times:
Offset
Length
Description
0x00
4
Page number (index into SectionPageMap), starts at 1
0x04
4
Data size for this page (compressed size).
0x08
8
Start offset for this page (OdUInt64). If this start offset is smaller than the
sum of the decompressed size of all previous pages, then this page is to be
preceded by zero pages until this condition is met.
Maximum section page size appears to be 0x7400 bytes in the normal case. If a logical section of the file
(the database objects, for example) exceeds this size, then it is broken up into pages of size 0x7400. In
this case, the PageCount value above will contain the number of 0x7400 byte pages, and the data from the
pages can be appended together in order and treated as a single logical section.
Section Types seen so far in 2004 files include (sections are present in the section map in this order):

Section Name
Description
Compressed?
Page size

Empty section
Yes
0x7400

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

30


AcDb:Security
Contains information regarding password and data
encryption. This section is optional.
no
0x7400
AcDb:FileDepList
Contains file dependencies (e.g. IMAGE files, or fonts
used by STYLE).
no
0x80
AcDb:VBAProject
Contains VBA Project data for this drawing (optional
section)
no
Data size
+ 0x80 +
padding
size
AcDb:AppInfo
Contains information about the application that wrote
the .dwg file (encrypted = 2).
no
0x80
AcDb:Preview
Bitmap preview for this drawing.
no
0x400
AcDb:SummaryInfo
Contains fields like Title, Subject, Author.
no
0x100
AcDb:RevHistory
Revision history
yes
0x7400
AcDb:AcDbObjects
Database objects
yes
0x7400
AcDb:ObjFreeSpace

yes
0x7400
AcDb:Template
Template (Contains the MEASUREMENT system
variable only.)
yes
0x7400
AcDb:Handles
Handle list with offsets into the AcDb:AcDbObjects
section
yes
0x7400
AcDb:Classes
Custom classes section
yes
0x7400
AcDb:AuxHeader

yes
0x7400
AcDb:Header
Contains drawing header variables
yes
0x7400
AcDb:Signature
Not written by ODA


The section order in the stream is different than the order in the section map. The order in the stream is as
follows:
Section:
File header
Empty section
AcDb:SummaryInfo

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

31


AcDb:Preview
AcDb:VBAProject
AcDb:AppInfo
AcDb:FileDepList
AcDb:RevHistory
AcDb:Security
AcDb:AcDbObjects
AcDb:ObjFreeSpace
AcDb:Template
AcDb:Handles
AcDb:Classes
AcDb:AuxHeader
AcDb:Header
Section map
Section page map

### 4.6 Encrypted Data Section Page Headers
Data section pages in the file start with a 32 byte encrypted section header. This encrypted header can be
decrypted using the following algorithm (assume that the raw section page header data is stored in the
hdrData array):
OdUInt32 secMask = 0x4164536b ^ offset;
OdUInt32* pHdr = (OdUInt32*)hdrData.asArrayPtr();
For (int j = 0; j < 8; j++)
*pHdr++ ^= secMask;
The decrypted section page header data consists of the following:


Open Design Specification for .dwg files

32


Offset
Length
Description
0x00
4
Section page type, since it’s always a data section: 0x4163043b
0x04
4
Section number
0x08
4
Data size (compressed)
0x0C
4
Page Size (decompressed)
0x10
4
Start Offset (in the decompressed buffer)
0x14
4
Page header Checksum (section page checksum calculated from unencoded
header bytes, with the data checksum as seed)
0x18
4
Data Checksum (section page checksum calculated from compressed data
bytes, with seed 0)
0x1C
4
Unknown (ODA writes a 0)

Each section page must start on a 0x20 byte boundary of the raw data stream. The empty bytes between
the start of this section and then end of the previous section are filled with as many bytes as needed from
the magic number sequence.-
### 4.7 Compression
The DWG file format version 2004 compression is a variation on the LZ77 compression algorithm. LZ77
is a sliding window algorithm that stores references (offset + length) to previous data. Note that length
might be greater than the offset, which is an important feature of this algorithm. The different opcodes are
explained below. Compression is a bit more difficult to implement than decompression. The bottleneck
with compression is finding a match. The simplest approach would be a brute force approach, the ODA
uses hashing for speed, sacrificing some compression.
A compressed section starts with a Literal Length (see below), which indicates the length of the first
sequence of uncompressed or literal data.
Following the first literal run, there will be a set of compression opcodes that define 3 values:
compressedBytes – Number of “compressed” bytes that are to be copied to this location from a previous
location in the uncompressed data stream.
compOffset – Offset backwards from the current location in the decompressed data stream, where the
“compressed” bytes should be copied from.

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

33


litCount – Number of uncompressed or literal bytes to be copied from the input stream, following the
addition of the compressed bytes.
After copying the specified compressed data and literal bytes, there will be another set of compression
opcodes that should be processed in a similar manner.
Each set of compression opcodes starts with a single byte, call it opcode1, which can have the following
values:
0x00 – 0x0F : Not used, because this would be mistaken for a Literal Length in some situations.
0x10:

compressedBytes is read as the next Long Compression Offset (see format below), with 9 added.

compOffset is read as the next Two Byte Offset (see format below), with 0x3FFF added.

If the litCount obtained from the Two Byte Offset is 0, then litCount is read as the next Literal
Length (see format below). Otherwise use the litCount value from the Two Byte Offset (0-3).
0x11 : Terminates the input stream.
0x12– 0x1F :

compressedBytes = (opcode1 & 0x0F) + 2

compOffset is read as the next Two Byte Offset (see format below), with 0x3FFF added.

If the litCount obtained from the Two Byte Offset is 0, then litCount is read as the next Literal
Length (see format below). Otherwise use the litCount value from the Two Byte Offset (0-3).
0x20 :

compressedBytes is read as the next Long Compression Offset (see format below) + 0x21.

compOffset is read as the next Two Byte Offset (see format below).

If the litCount obtained from the Two Byte Offset is 0, then litCount is read as the next Literal
Length (see format below). Otherwise use the litCount value from the Two Byte Offset (0-3).
0x21 – 0x3F :

compressedBytes = opcode1 – 0x1E.

compOffset is read as the next Two Byte Offset (see format below).

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

34



If the litCount obtained from the Two Byte Offset is 0, then litCount is read as the next Literal
Length (see format below). Otherwise use the litCount value from the Two Byte Offset (0-3).
0x40 – 0xFF :

compressedBytes = ((opcode1 & 0xF0) >> 4) – 1

Read the next byte (call it opcode2):

compOffset = (opcode2 << 2)  |  ((opcode1 & 0x0C) >> 2)

The value of litCount is set based on the value of (opcode1 & 0x03):
o 0x00 : litCount is read as the next Literal Length (see format below)
o 0x01 : litCount = 1
o 0x02 : litCount = 2
o 0x03 : litCount = 3
Literal Length
0x01 –  0x0E : 4 – 0x12 (add 3 to the actual value)
0xF0 : any bit set in the high nibble indicates that the literal length is 0, and this byte is actually the next
compression opcode (opcode1).
0x00 : Set the running total to 0x0F, and read the next byte. From this point on, a 0x00 byte adds 0xFF to
the running total, and a non-zero byte adds that value to the running total and terminates the process. Add
3 to the final result.
Examples:
0x05 : 0x08
0x00 0x02 : 0x14 (0x0F + 2 + 3)

Two Byte Offset
firstByte = readByte()
offset = (firstByte >> 2)  | (readByte() << 6))
litCount = (firstByte & 0x03)
Long Compression Offset
0x01 – 0xFF : Use this value as is.

Open Design Specification for .dwg files

35


0x00 : Set the running total to 0xFF, and read the next byte. For each 0x00 byte read, add 0xFF to the
running total. When a non-zero byte is encountered, add this value to the running total, and terminate the
process.
Examples:
0xDD : 0xDD
0x00 0x00 0x34 : 0x232 (0xFF + 0xFF + 0x34)






Open Design Specification for .dwg files

36